ESC102 20261 Student Engineer Design Portfolio Independent Assessment Tool
UTORid Assessor Grade /20
Requirements (check only violations; minus 0.5 per violation after first violation)
1. Shall be submitted to Quercus as a single PDF document containing the portfolio as design or with a website URL and screenshots.
2. Shall include a reference list at the end of the PDF document in the Praxis “embedded extract” form using a standard format (e.g. APA, IEEE).
3. Shall include a statement of your position as an engineering designer.
4. Shall include one-page summaries of your primary design activities completed since September 2025 (Praxis I, CIV102 bridge, Praxis II).
5. For each design project, shall include an annotation that explains and interprets the design project (including the process) in context.
6. Shall only include design projects done since September 2025. May include evidence from prior design activities as part of your position in context.
7. For each design project, shall include at least three (3) distinct CTMFs that were used in or are relevant for that design project, for a total of at
least nine (9) distinct CTMFs.
8. Shall include CTMFs that cover all strands of Frame•Diverge•Converge•Represent.
9. Should include only CTMFs for which you can provide evidence of your use in an engineering project context, or that you can credibly connect
to an engineering project by retroactively analyzing it.
10.Shall give credit for design work performed by teammates (as per the University of Toronto Code of Academic Behaviour and the Professional
Engineers Ontario Code of Ethics)
Evaluation criteria Unacceptable Satisfactory Good Outstanding You want your assessor thinking…
The clarity of your position in context and its
effectiveness in representing your approach to
engineering design.
The author’s position is unmentioned, mentioned tacitly
requiring the reader to infer it, or is largely irrelevant to
engineering design; no or largely superficial connections
are made between the position and values, abilities,
strengths, etc.
The author’s position is mentioned explicitly and is recognizably
contextualized to engineering design; contextualization may be
generic or partial
The author’s position is centred on engineering design and
the values, abilities, strengths, etc. they bring to their
practice.
As per Good +
The author’s position on engineering design is woven into
the presentation of the design products in a critical,
reflective way that balances the positive and negative
implications of the position.
I have a really good understanding of how
you approach engineering design and why
you take the approach you do.
The validity of your position as demonstrated
through evidence from and explanation/
interpretation of your projects.
No connections between stated position and cited projects
are stated or implied; stated position and evidence/
explanation/interpretation contradict one another or appear
unrelated.
Obvious, broad connections between stated position and
examples from projects or stages of projects; some connections
are more developed (e.g. direct, detailed) than others; there is an
emphasis on breadth over depth, which limits interpretation.
Projects have been deliberately explained and interpreted
to show the application of aspects of student’s position to
aspects of design process; the position has been used to
inform how the portfolio is represented and/or organized.
As per Good +
Projects are integrated and/or contrasted with one another
to show nuances of student’s position applied to
engineering design.
I can see how your position is playing into
how you see engineering design from how
this is set up! I can tell what is important to
you in your practice of engineering design.
The appropriateness of the selection of evidence
from design projects to reflect how you practice
engineering design according to your position.
Evidence is missing, incomplete, irrelevant, or
disconnected from the practice and from design activities.
Selected evidence is clearly connected to practice and design
activities. Connections may be simplistic. Selection of evidence
may lack variety and quantity (e.g. imbalance between idea-
generation, decision-making, and teamwork activities).
Selected evidence includes a variety of engineering design
activities that includes team process activities as well as
demonstrating reflection on student’s breadth of
experiences.
As per Good +
Discussion of connections between selected evidence and
design activity demonstrates development and reflection on
student’s values, practice, and engineering identity.
For each project in this portfolio, I feel like
I have just the right amount of information
to understand it and how it relates to your
approach to engineering design.
The utility and clarity of your summaries and
annotations in providing context for and
interpreting your design projects, and in linking
your evidence to your position and design
products.
Descriptions of design projects are missing or incomplete.
No or largely superficial connections are made between the
position, design products, and the design process in each
project.
Design projects are described in general terms, with limited
connections between the context/stakeholders and the final
products. Design descriptions are vague or incomplete.
Recognizable connections to the position and the design process
are present in annotations but the implications of the position
and/or process are unstated or vague.
The summary and annotation of each of the projects clearly
describes the project context, key design considerations,
and the final design solution. Key features of the design are
highlighted.
Selected potential implications of the position on critical
aspects of engineering design practice and the process in
each project are included.
As per Good +
The annotations effectively highlight the author’s skills and
experiences gained through the process.
The author’s position on engineering design is woven into
the presentation and annotation of the design products in a
critical, reflective way that balances various implications of
the position.
For each project in this portfolio, your
annotations help me gain a deeper
understanding of the process you used,
how it influenced the product, and how it
is informed by and informs your approach
to engineering design.
The appropriateness of the selection of CTMFs
based on actual experience in using them and/or
their relevance to your design work, and based
on a legitimate ability to assess them from having
used them.
The CTMFs appear arbitrary or chosen just to satisfy the
assignment with little connection to actual practice; CTMF
selection is either thin (too few, or not balanced across
FDCR) or indiscriminate (cramming in everything) with little
evidence of actual “selection” based inclusion. No
assessment or irrelevant assessment of CTMFs is
provided.
CTMFs selected are consistent with the position and design
experience. The selected CTMFs show reasonable coverage of a
design process and activities. The assessment of CTMFs may be
uneven, or sometimes simplistic. The assessment may fail to
consider either lessons learned, potential uses, or value of the
CTMF.
CTMFs selected clearly support not only position and
strengths, but also as a guard against biases. They are well
demonstrated in design experience. The assessment of
CTMFs is clear and meaningful, and considers lessons
learned, potential uses, or value of the CTMF.
As per Good +
CTMFs show a broad range of design activities from across
the stages of the design process; the assessments are both
personal—coming out of specific experience—and can
usefully transfer to later design work.
This set of CTMFs shows that you have
been approaching all strands of the
design process with rigour, intentionality,
and thoughtfulness.
The utility and clarity of your explanations and
annotations in providing context for and
evaluating your use of CTMFs in your design
process.
The explanations are disconnected from the practice, or
CTMF; annotations are missing; explanations lack any
reflection on the utility or appropriateness of the CTMF to
the practice, or CTMFs themselves.
The explanations and annotations provide links between the
practice and CTMFs or design activities. They may be vague,
generic, or only for the representative products
Explanations and annotations connect the practice, design
activities, and CTMFs. Annotations allow for quick
understanding of figures, and explanations facilitate moving
between the elements of the Handbook. They allow the
reader to identify similar themed items (e.g. multiple uses of
a CTMF, uses in multiple contexts, recurring values, etc.)
As per Good +
The annotations for figures in the CTMFs focus the reader’s
attention on specific features that will help use the CTMF
better in the future. Explanations show where specific
values, biases and strengths influenced the design, CTMF
usage, or design process.
It’s easy for me to quickly understand why
you’ve included this CTMF and how it has
contributed to your practice of engineering
design.
The ease of navigation through the portfolio,
including the ease with which a reader can find
supporting evidence for the claims in your
document.
The portfolio lacks any system or obvious structure to use
to navigate the links between claims and evidence, practice
and products, or CTMFs and practice. It will not be easy to
use later. The document does not have a logical flow/
sequencing. Lack of explicit structural and transitional cues
leads to a lack of coherence and navigability
The portfolio has a straightforward structure (e.g. chronological,
steps in design practice, product by product, or…) that allows a
reader to follow it, and will allow a future user to use it effectively;
the product/practice components used to link to CTMFs may not
always follow a consistent logic. Explicit structural prompts guide
navigation and demarcate content. A reader can refer to the
portfolio to quickly be reminded of design projects and associated
CTMFs.
The portfolio follows a logical structure and makes effective
use of the product/practice components to structure and
link the CTMFs for easy reference later. Logical
development of organization and navigation are reinforced
by explicit structural cues. Portfolio creates coherence
through consistence of values, priorities and design
practice throughout.
As per Good +
The portfolio offers a unique and meaningful arrangement
of elements that is both easy to follow and clearly
demonstrates how the author’s approach to engineering
design will support future design work.
This portfolio is easy to follow and
organized in a way that is both logical and
relevant for you as you’ve defined your
approach to engineering design.
The clarity, correctness, and conciseness of
written prose.
Prose is confusing, or shows signs of carelessness through
high level of error. Prose does not demonstrate application
of engineering communication principles; it is excessively
verbose or overly dependent on general terms.
Prose requires some effort to understand; or has some errors but
they rarely affect understanding. Prose applies principles, though
use may be awkward or simplistic. It offers sufficient information.
Mostly logical development of ideas.There may be some
redundancy or over dependence on general rather than specific
terms.
The prose shows appropriate selection and balance of text
and image.Prose demonstrates clarity at the paragraph,
sentence and word choice levels, with minimal error. Prose
applies principles in ways that enhance the reading
experience, partly by being direct, precise, and specific,
contributing to concision.
As per Good +
The writing demonstrates the writer’s unique voice to reveal
a sense of the author’s engineering identity through word
choice, sentence structure choices, clarity, concision,
headings, proofreading, etc.
The writing in your portfolio allowed me to
understand your process and outcomes
efficiently and clearly as uniquely yours.
The value, quality, and integration of visual
elements in your portfolio.
Visuals are missing, of poor quality, or provide limited
relevant information, are poorly integrated into text, or fail to
provide relevant evidence. Design and/or quality of visuals
renders them confusing, unclear; missing expected
features such as annotations, captions, etc.
Visuals provide some useful record of design products, design
practice, CTMFs, and CTMF use but may be difficult to
understand or interpret even with integration into the text. Design
of visuals mostly clear, including captions and annotations.
Visuals are of sufficient size and clarity to be useful, though
redrawing them may have improved their utility.
Visuals provide rich, relevant information about products,
practice, and CTMFs. Visuals are purposefully selected to
show different uses or support specific conclusions. Design
of visuals clear, maximizing intended signal and limiting
noise. Visuals may have been redrawn/edited to improve
their quality or enhance overall coherence in the portfolio.
As per Good +
The layout and visual elements enhance the reader’s
comprehension; the connection between visuals and
explanations enhances understanding
I can quickly grasp the key ideas from the
visual elements you’ve chosen to include,
and I’m never unsure where to look or
focus.
